Port-Models doc (#321)
stanford-crfm/levanter: docs/Port-Models.md

# Porting Models to Levanter

## Overview

> This guide outlines the process of porting new models into Levanter. While we emphasize adding a causal language model (LM) that is implemented in Hugging Face, these steps are applicable to general models from multiple sources.

Author: ```suggestion
This guide outlines the process of porting new models into Levanter. While we emphasize the scenario of adding a causal language model (LM) that is implemented in Hugging Face, this guide is applicable to general models from all sources.
```

1. Extend your config class from `HFCompatConfig`
2. Write class functions `to_hf_config()` and `from_hf_config()` that maps the input parameters to the corresponding Hugging Face parameters.

For example, in Llama, we have the following:

```python
from transformers import PretrainedConfig as HfPretrainedConfig
from levanter.compat.hf_checkpoints import HFCompatConfig

# ...

class LlamaConfig(HFCompatConfig):
    # ...
    @classmethod
    def from_hf_config(cls, hf_config: HfPretrainedConfig):
        return LlamaConfig(
            seq_len=hf_config.max_position_embeddings,
            hidden_dim=hf_config.hidden_size,
            intermediate_dim=hf_config.intermediate_size,
            num_layers=hf_config.num_hidden_layers,
            num_heads=hf_config.num_attention_heads,
            activation_function=hf_config.hidden_act,
            initializer_range=hf_config.initializer_range,
            layer_norm_epsilon=hf_config.rms_norm_eps,
            rope_scaling=hf_config.rope_scaling,
        )
```

#### Register Your Model
Lastly, there are a few steps to register a model in Levanter and make it tightly integrated with the training pipeline:

> 1. For language models, You can register your config class with `LmConfig.register_subclass("ModelName")`. By doing so, the trainer can use the name as the `model.type` field from the training configuration file to identify your config and model.

Author: ```suggestion
1. For language models, You can register your config class with `LmConfig.register_subclass("ModelName")`. By doing so, the trainer can use the name from the `model.type` field in the training configuration file to identify your config and model.
```

Below is an example:

```python
@LmConfig.register_subclass("gpt2") # if implementing a Causal Language model
@dataclass(frozen=True)  # for parsing the config file
class MyConfig(HFCompatConfig):
    # ...
    @property
    def model_type(cls) -> Type["Gpt2LMHeadModel"]:
        return Gpt2LMHeadModel
```

### Write Model
After you have defined your config class, you can start writing your model.
You can follow the breakdown of the model in your Hugging Face implementation (or from other sources). This would make it easier to validate the implementation through unit tests.

For example, in GPT2, we have the following breakdown:
- `Gpt2Mlp`
- `Gpt2Attention`
- `Gpt2Block`: a block of Gpt2Mlp and Gpt2Attention
- `Gpt2Transformer`: a stack of Gpt2Block
- `Gpt2Embeddings`: token and position embeddings
- `Gpt2LMHead`: a complete GPT2 model with embedding, transformer, and LM head.

We follow the same breakdown in the implementation of Llama in Levanter.

#### Note on the Implementation Format
- Each class will have its key layers and components defined as attributes and be initialized with a static method `init()`.

> - If Each class will be extended from Equinox's `Module` class.

Author: ```suggestion
- Each class will be extended from Equinox's `Module` class.
```

A state dict is a Python `dict` with string keys and tensor values. The keys of the dict are json-ish "key paths" like `model.blocks.0.mlp.c_proj` and the values are the corresponding parameters for that key path.
You can read more about [PyTorch State Dicts here](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/recipes/what_is_state_dict.html).

Levanter has machinery for (de)serializing to and from state dicts. Simple cases are handled automatically, but often times custom logic is needed.

#### Easy Case: Identical Module Structure
If your module has exactly the same fields with the same names and same shapes as the Hugging Face state dict (e.g. Gpt2Mlp), you don't need to do anything.

#### Medium Case: Different Names
If for some reason you want to use different names from the HF implementation (e.g. because the names from HF aren't clear...), you can extend your class from  `StateDictSerializationMixin` and use `_state_dict_key_map` to rename keys. For instance, the `Gpt2Transformer` class has this method:

```python
class Gpt2Transformer(StateDictSerializationMixin, eqx.Module):
    ...

    def _state_dict_key_map(self) -> Dict[str, Optional[str]]:
        return {"blocks": "h"}
```

> This says that the field called `blocks`` in this class should be (de)serialized as `h``, because the Hugging Face GPT-2 implementation uses `h``, which is not very clear. You can also "flatten" the submodules of a field by using `None`` or even include `.s` in the name if needed.

Author: ```suggestion
This says that the field called `blocks` in this class should be (de)serialized as `h`, because the Hugging Face GPT-2 implementation uses `h`, which is not very clear. You can also "flatten" the submodules of a field by using `None` or even include `.s` in the name if needed.
```

```python
def from_state_dict(self, state_dict: StateDict, prefix: Optional[str] = None) -> "LlamaAttention":
    # unflatten the linear layers of HF state_dict to match the shape of LlamaAttention
    d = {}
    d.update(unflatten_linear_layers(apply_prefix(prefix, "q_proj"), state_dict, self.q_proj, True))
    d.update(unflatten_linear_layers(apply_prefix(prefix, "k_proj"), state_dict, self.k_proj, True))
    d.update(unflatten_linear_layers(apply_prefix(prefix, "v_proj"), state_dict, self.v_proj, True))
    d.update(unflatten_linear_layers(apply_prefix(prefix, "o_proj"), state_dict, self.o_proj, True))

    return super().from_state_dict(d, prefix)
```

Similarly, to save weights to Hugging Face, you will need to write a class function `to_state_dict()` in each of your model class.

The correctness of your implementation can be validated through serialization tests, which will be discussed in the next section.

## Write Tests
There are two types of tests that you should write for your model: unit tests and serialization tests.

### [Optional] Unit Tests

> Unit tests are very useful for testing the correctness of your model implementation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

    torch_out = torch_out.numpy()
    assert np.isclose(torch_out, np.array(jax_out.array), rtol=1e-4, atol=1e-4).all(), f"{torch_out} != {jax_out}"
```

Be sure to use `np.isclose` with reasonably loose tolerances to account for numerical differences.

For input variables that are common among tests, you can create a helper function to generate them.
For example, below is the helper function for unit tests in Llama:

```python
def _get_random_inputs(config: LlamaConfig):
    Embed = config.Embed
    Pos = config.Pos
    Batch = hax.Axis("batch", 2)
    x = hax.random.normal(random.PRNGKey(0), (Batch, Pos, Embed))
    mask = hax.nn.attention.causal_mask(config.Pos, config.KeyPos)
    return x, mask
```

If your module contains model weights, such consistency tests would require you to load weight from your module in Levanter to the reference module in HuggingFace. We will discuss how to do that in the next section.

### Serialization Tests

In order to validate the implementation on Levanter matches with the reference implementation in HuggingFace, we would like to pass the same input to both implementations and compare the output.

> However, if the model are initialized with different weights, such comparison would not be meaningful. Therefore, we will need to serialize the weights from HuggingFace and load them into Levanter, or vice versa. We call such test "serialization test".

Author: ```suggestion
However, if the model are initialized with different weights, such comparison would not be meaningful. Therefore, we will need to serialize the weights from Hugging Face transformers and load them into Levanter, or vice versa. We call such test "serialization test".
```

> For modules like Attention, Mlp, and Embeddings, you can read the weight from Levanter in memory and load into corresponding modules in HuggingFace. For example, in Llama, we did the following:

Author: ```suggestion
For modules like Attention, Mlp, and Embeddings, you can read the weight from Levanter as state dict in memory and load into corresponding modules in HuggingFace. For example, in Llama, we did the following:
```
